We will start with the second chapter on science class 6 that talks about the components of food.
Now definitely since we are talking about food it would be one of the mouth watering classes that you would come across.
Now when we talk about the components of food we first talk about the components that are derived either from plants or from animals.
So we have a list of
food products which are derived from plants and which are derived from animals.
So let's say meat, fish, all milk products.
So you have cheese, paneer, butter.
So all those would be food products that are derived from animals and in the first diagram we have all the pulses, nuts.
So all those would be example of food products that are derived from plants.
So, first of all we understand that the food products can be classified into two heights, one that is derived from the plants and the other that is derived from the animals.
Now, when we talk about the composition, what does food product actually includes?
So, food includes various components.
We cannot say I can eat potatoes for the whole day.
If I eat potatoes for the whole day, the only source of energy that I would be getting is carbohydrates.
Similarly, if I am eating only green vegetables, I would be getting minerals and vitamins.
But to have a kind of healthy body and a balanced diet, we need to have a balance of all the essential things that we require.
So our body requires for a good functioning carbohydrates and fats.
Carbohydrates and fats together are known as energy giving food.
So both carbohydrates and fats provide energy.
Now good examples of fat would be ghee, oil.
So all those would go under fats.
When we talk about carbohydrates, we will talk or we will understand about the food that provides starch.
So for example, rice,
you have potatoes.
So all those would be rich in carbohydrate.
Coming on to the next category you have proteins.
Proteins are those which are considered as body building or those are the building blocks of the body.
So they help in the growth of the body.
As a result some of the common things that include protein are pulses
So, from the vegetarian diet or from the plant sources we can say those are pulses.
So, we are being is indeed a very rich source of protein.
From the animal sources you have meat, fish.
So, all those would be sources of protein.
Then you again have egg.
Coming on to the next category.
The next category is vitamins on minerals.
Vitamins are minerals.
are basically considered as the protective food.
So they help us build immune system and once you have a strong immune system, you have the resistance to fight the various diseases.
So vitamins and minerals are obtained from various plants.
So all the fruits, all the green leafy vegetables are with sources of vitamins and minerals.
And finally, you have fiber that is essential for the diet.
So fiber basically comes as rough age and most of it is removed as undigested part.
However this is important for the normal functioning of the body and therefore fiber which is also classified in higher standards as you go you would come across the word rough age
And that is very important source or important constituent of your daily diet.
Now we have talked about what all incorporates or includes our diet.
Now we would come across the various tests to understand whether a component has decent amount of carbohydrate, decent amount of fats or not.
Understanding that is again very important.
We have different tests that we would apply to help understand bees.
But a kind of general idea about this.
Again, we would repeat the basic elements, carbohydrates and fats provide us energy.
Definitely fats provide more energy as compared to carbohydrates.
Proteins are the building blocks or they provide or help in the growth of the body.
Vitamins and minerals are protective foods, they protect us from the various diseases.
Again under vitamins you have different vitamins, you have A, D, E, K. All these are fat soluble with vitamins
Then you have vitamin B and C which are water soluble.
So, we classify vitamins as water soluble and fat soluble.
Vitamin B and C are water soluble and dissolve in water very quickly.
So, all the green leafy vegetables you have lemon juice, orange juice, all those citrus fruits which are rich in vitamin C would dissolve in water or are soluble in water.
However, vitamin A, D, E, K are fat soluble.
So, that is again very, very important.
Fibers come from the various pulses, green leafy vegetables, grains, all these add to the bulk or the volume of the food that we intake.
Now, let us start with the various test.
So, the first test we would do is for understanding the amount of fat.
So, we have two blotting papers here.
This is a plain blotting paper as you can see and does not have any strain.
Now, what I did was I put down few drops of oil on this
piece of paper.
So, if you can see this sheet turns out to be translucent and there can be difference in the two colors that could be seen and that is primarily due to the presence of the oil.
So, when you put a drop of oil on a blotting paper you can try it at home by yourself.
When you put a drop of oil on a blotting paper it would leave a scar or a kind of blot and the paper would turn to be translucent.
So, to make the simple here, we explain the three terms opaque, transparent and translucent.
So, this sheet of paper is opaque.
I cannot see through it.
You cannot see my face when this sheet is in between.
However, let me bring this jar in between and you can see the reflection here out.
And therefore, you this is a kind of transparent.
Since there are two layers, it is not exactly that transparent.
The next is translucent.
When you look through a translucent thing, it appears to be a kind of blurred image.
So what you can see is the hand you can see here is a kind of blurred image of a hand rather than a clean image of a hand which you can see through a transparent object like I have a
glass here and from here you can see the hand is very clear and that is what is transparent.
So we understood opaque transparent and translucent within this lecture and we talked about the test of fat.
Now coming on to the test of starch, I have a potato here.
I will just take a section out of it and I have this section.
What I will do is I will pour a drop of iodine.
So I have iodine here.
and I will pour a drop of iodine on this.
Now, when I pour a drop of iodine on the crushed potato, it initially the iodine was red and orange in color, but what happened here was a kind of dark violet scar is seen and that shows this potato has significant amount of starch.
So, when you take a test of starch, you put iodine on potato or rice or whatever experiment you want to do.
And then you can see a kind of blue black color that is sea.
And therefore, we can say that this potato has starch.
Coming on to the next test, that is protein.
Now for the taste of protein, I have two things here.
One is the dal solution that's normal chanadal.
And then you have a milk.
We will put the drops of copper sulfate and caustic soda or sodium hydroxide.
that's NaOH, so you have NaOH and C2SO4 copper sulphate that we would be mixing in this.
So what I'll do is I'll simply mix this solution that I have here in both of this and let's turn out to see what the results are there.
So this and the milk just a second.
So we have this solution with the milk as well.
And now what I do is I'll steer it.
So when I steer it you have a color change that is seen and then you can see this milk turns out to be kind of bluish purple color that is seen and then you have this dal solution that I would try to steer here and you would have a color change that is seen.
So you would have a blue
purple color that is seen.
Now the component of the color that is seen in this is different from this and that shows both of them have components of protein but the amount of protein in these two vary.
The one that comes out with a dark purple color would have a higher component of protein as compared to one that comes out with a light purple color.
So that is what is the test of protein.
So what we have done for now is the test of starch
which we did using the potato and putting out iodine on it.
Then we had the test of starch which we saw with the oil and the plotting paper.
And finally, the test for protein where we put out a solution of copper sulfate and NaOH that is caustic soda into the two protein samples that we have taken.
Now again I have a piece of wallet here.
What I do is I take a small section of this and I simply press it with my finger.
Now this is something that you can do at your home and check out.
Keep pressing it for a while and once you remove it, if you look onto the finger carefully you would have kind of oil drops that I see and that shows the presence of oil or fat in the wallet.
So, that is what is the experiment to understand the various components in the food.
Now, definitely when we are using the various components, there is a requirement for the balanced diet.
If we do not meet out with that balanced diet, a body suffers from various deficiencies and these deficiencies lead to different kind of diseases.
So, deficiency of each and every component in the body leads to different kind of diseases.
So if there is deficiency of vitamin A, you would have poor vision.
If there is deficiency of vitamin B, now vitamin B as you move into the higher standards, it is further classified as B1, B2, B12 and so on and so forth.
So each and every vitamin would have a kind of different deficiency disorder.
Berryberry is a common disease.
Then basically what happens is the muscles get weaker when you have deficiency of vitamin B. Vitamin C deficiency leads to scurvy.
Now this disease was common in the sailors.
What used to happen is the sailors or the navigators used to travel a lot and in the ocean they could not find food that are rich in vitamin C and they used to suffer from the deficiency of vitamin C which was predominantly the bleeding gums.
Now what their sailors later on used to do was they used to carry along with them
small amount of lemons and oranges so that they can meet out the deficiency of vitamin C. The next is vitamin D. Vitamin D can be obtained through natural exposure from the sunlight and a deficiency of vitamin D leads to a disease which is known as rickets.
Then again from the minerals you have iron,
iodine, calcium, those are predominant.
Calcium helps in the formation of strong bones.
Deficiency of calcium would lead to breaking of the bones or decay of the bones.
Then you have iodine.
Deficiency of iodine leads to a disease known as guiter.
Similarly, iron deficiency leads to anemia or lack of hemoglobin in the blood.
Now blood comprises of three cells, RBCWBC and platelets.
red blood corpses then you have white blood and finally you have platelets.
So red blood says have hemoglobin and efficiency of the hemoglobin leads to the disease which is anemia.
So that's the kind of basic outline that we understand.
Now we come on to a very important aspect of food.
All of us consume food for our survival but have you ever thought about cleaning and handling of the food
The food that we eat is not available in nature as it is.
It undergoes series of handling processes and finally we have a food item that we can enjoy and eat.
Now, we would understand what are those series of steps that go through.
Before that, there is a common myth which says costlier foods
are much more nutritious, that's a kind of proper myth and that actually does not happen.
Each and every food is important for a balanced diet as we said.
Again, washing of the food, cleaning of the food, those are some of the basic things that are required.
So what we do is, if supposedly if you want to consume an apple, you would wash an apple and then eat an apple.
So that's the way to remove the outer germs that exist on the food.
Again when we talk about apple you have the outer layer most of the nutrients are present just underneath that outer layer.
So whenever you are peeling a kind of fruit it's very important you have a very thin layer that is being peeled out as a result maximum nutrients are preserved.
Now here we have a table this would be available on the website.
So you would have the various vitamins and the diseases and what does the deficiency lead to?
Most of that we have already discussed.
Now we would come on to one of the most important aspects is cleaning of the food.
There are four ways, I would say five primary ways in which we can clean the food.
The first is threshing.
Now, what happens is if you go on to the countryside area villages, you would see you have stalks of greens that are there.
So, these stalks are being trashed on the ground and finally, you have the greens that are separated from the long stacks.
And that is what is the process of threshing.
The next comes is, sorry, the next that comes is winoing.
Undervenuing what happens is you try to separate out based on the weight.
So I have some peanuts here that you can see.
Now these peanuts some of them does not have a cover and others have a cover.
So what I do is I simply crush those out and what you can see is if I
put a blow of air the lighter covers with flow away.
So, what people used to do or people still do in villages you can see you have a kind of dish where you keep all the greens and you just blow air.
So, you can see most of the lighter things flew away and you have the solid part that remains.
So, this separation
which is done by the process of winoing separates things based on the density.
So the lighter the things those flow away and the heavier remains in the or heavier comes down and the lighter flows away.
So that's what is winoing.
The next is sewing.
Now sewing is done through what we say a kind of net.
What happens is I have two things here.
I have a tray that I put here and I just put this here.
I put some peanuts here and then I put some mustard seeds which are very small.
So these small mustard seeds when I put here they came down in the plate and that's what we try to explain.
So what happens is we separate things based on the size.
So size and the number.
What happens under seedling is we separate out two things based on the size and the number.
Then is hand picking.
Hand picking is very simple.
I have a kind of set of things here.
So I have mustard seeds.
I can separate those.
I have peanuts.
I have almonds and I have walnuts.
So I can separate all of these by hand picking.
So hand picking can be done based on size, based on color, based on the shape.
So there can be various ways under which you can do hand picking.
So these are the primary four things that we understand.
The next set that we would be talking about talks about four important aspects that separation, then you have sedimentation, filtration and finally decantation.
Now let's talk about separation.
I have a flask here.
Just see this carefully.
So you have 3 layers out here.
The top most is the mustard oil.
Below the mustard oil we have water and in the lower most layer we have sand.
Now what we have done is we have done a separation between oil and water.
So these two liquids occur in different levels and you can see those very clearly as separated out and therefore we tell that this is the process of separation.
What happens under sedimentation is the stones or the bigger size particles settle down and that is what is sedimentation.
Now same thing when we want to explain decantation what I do is I take another
thing and I drop the upper layer here.
So, what would happen is the water would be separated from the oil or I put this water and oil mixture in a big flask or a kind of funnel and just pour it.
So, what would happen is the lighter things and the heavier things would separate out and when you are doing that in two different containers
So, you have oil in one container, you have water in another container.
So, what would happen is that process would be known as decantation and finally, is filtration.
So, filtration is just removing the two liquids.
So, basically if you are preparing tea, you are removing the tea leaves and the tea that you can see.
in the cup below.
So, that is the process of filtration.
Filtration can be also done with filter paper.
However, all of this what we have discussed now the separation of substance is a separate chapter 5 that we would be continuing again and we would be discussing the same things in further detail in that lecture.
So, here we are just bringing this into the concept to help understand the idea of cleaning of the food.
So, here our basic focus is
how do we clean the foods?
So, sedimentation as we said you mix sediment with water and this sediment settles out and you have the water on the upper area.
Similarly, you have the decantation process that occurs.
So, as we said food can be cleaned by various processes first is been knowing where you have the impurity that is separated based on the weight as we did in the case of peanut, we removed out the cover of the peanut.
Then you have hand picking, we can pick by hand.
Threshing where the stalks are separated from the grains, sieving where you have the impurity that are separated based on the size and the number.
So, what we did through using this net was the example of sieving.
And finally, sedimentation, decandation, filtration and separation.
So, all this we have tried to introduce only with respect to cleaning of the food here.
We would be covering all this in detail when we would be talking about the separation of substances in the further chapters.
So, stay tuned for more updates and more lectures in science.
We would definitely be working around classics and we would move on to higher lectures.
As we complete class 6 do subscribe to the channel if you have any suggestions or any comments leave those in the comment box below will be happy to resolve it have a very good day ahead.